Adds blog post: performance benchmarking best practices (#4635)
istio/istio.io: content/blog/2019/performance-best-practices/index.md

---
title: "Best Practices: Benchmarking Service Mesh Performance"
description: "Tools and guidance for evaluating Istio's data plane performance."
publishdate: 2019-07-09
subtitle:

> attribution: John Howard (Google), Mandar Jog (Google), Megan O'Keefe (Google)

Reviewer: Megan, please put your name first on the list.

Earlier this year, we published a [blog post](/blog/2019/istio1.1_perf/) on Istio's performance improvements in version 1.1. Following the release of [Istio 1.2](/about/notes/1.2/), we want to provide guidance and tools to help you benchmark Istio's data plane performance in a production-ready Kubernetes environment.

Overall, we found that Istio's [sidecar proxy](/docs/concepts/what-is-istio/#envoy) latency scales with the number of concurrent connections. At 1000 requests per second (RPS), across 16 connections, Istio adds **3 milliseconds** per request in the 50th percentile, and **10 milliseconds** in the 99th percentile.

> In the [Istio Tools repository](https://github.com/istio/tools/tree/de2ab3e4650a2eab47002928a42fd5616f395dc2/perf/benchmark), you’ll find scripts and instructions for measuring Istio's data plane performance, with additional instructions on how to run the scripts with Linkerd, another service mesh implementation. [Follow along](https://github.com/istio/tools/tree/76e3cb2488303316c8511a3ebe9676828c9d4765/perf/benchmark#setup) as we detail some best practices for each step of the performance test framework.

Reviewer 2: Nice article!
Should Linkerd be linked to linkerd.io?
```suggestion
In the [Istio Tools repository](https://github.com/istio/tools/tree/de2ab3e4650a2eab47002928a42fd5616f395dc2/perf/benchmark), you’ll find scripts and instructions for measuring Istio's data plane performance, with additional instructions on how to run the scripts with [Linkerd](https://linkerd.io/), another service mesh implementation. [Follow along](https://github.com/istio/tools/tree/76e3cb2488303316c8511a3ebe9676828c9d4765/perf/benchmark#setup) as we detail some best practices for each step of the performance test framework.
```

## 1. Use a production-ready Istio installation

To accurately measure the performance of a service mesh at scale, it's important to use an [adequately-sized](https://github.com/istio/tools/tree/de2ab3e4650a2eab47002928a42fd5616f395dc2/perf/istio-install#istio-setup) Kubernetes cluster. We test using three worker nodes, each with at least 4 vCPUs and 15 GB of memory.

Then, it's important to use a production-ready Istio **installation profile** on that cluster. This lets us achieve performance-oriented settings such as control plane pod autoscaling, and ensures that resource limits are appropriate for heavy traffic load. The [default](/docs/setup/kubernetes/install/helm/#option-1-install-with-helm-via-helm-template) Istio installation is suitable for most benchmarking use cases. For extensive performance benchmarking, with thousands of proxy-injected services, we also provide [a tuned Istio install](https://github.com/istio/tools/blob/76e3cb2488303316c8511a3ebe9676828c9d4765/perf/istio-install/values.yaml) that allocates extra memory and CPU to the Istio control plane.

> Note that Istio's [demo installation](/docs/setup/kubernetes/install/kubernetes/) is not suitable for performance testing, because it is designed to be deployed on a small trial cluster, and has full tracing and access logs enabled to showcase Istio's features.

Reviewer: I think there is a way colorize or otherwise emphasize this more.

Reviewer 3: There is, I suggest you use a warning:
```suggestion
{{< warning >}}
Istio's [demo installation](/docs/setup/kubernetes/install/kubernetes/) is not suitable for performance testing, because it is designed to be deployed on a small trial cluster, and has full tracing and access logs enabled to showcase Istio's features.
{{< /warning >}}
```
You can see how the call outs render here: https://istio.io/test/callouts/

1.  **Telemetry reporting:** Each proxy sends raw telemetry data to {{<gloss>}}Mixer{{</gloss>}}, which Mixer processes into metrics, traces, and other telemetry. The raw telemetry data is similar to access logs, and therefore comes at a cost. Access log processing consumes CPU and keeps a worker thread from picking up the next unit of work. At higher throughput, it is more likely that the next unit of work is waiting in the queue to be picked up by the worker. This can lead to long-tail (99th percentile) latency for Envoy.
1.  **Custom policy checks:** When using [custom Istio policy adapters](/docs/concepts/observability/), policy checks are on the request path. This means that request headers and metadata on the data path will be sent to the control plane (Mixer), resulting in higher request latency. **Note:** These policy checks are [disabled by default](/docs/reference/config/installation-options/#global-options), as the most common policy use case (RBAC) is performed entirely by the Envoy proxies.

> Both of these exceptions will go away in a future Istio release, when [Mixer V2](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1QKmtem5jU_2F3Lh5SqLp0IuPb80_70J7aJEYu4_gS-s) moves all policy and telemetry features directly into the sidecar proxies.

Reviewer: `directly into the proxies`   drop the word `sidecar`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Both of these exceptions will go away in a future Istio release, when [Mixer V2](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1QKmtem5jU_2F3Lh5SqLp0IuPb80_70J7aJEYu4_gS-s) moves all policy and telemetry features directly into the proxies.
```

Why test with only two pods? Because scaling up throughput (RPS) and connections (threads) has a greater effect on Envoy's performance than increasing the total size of the service registry — or, the total number of pods and services in the Kubernetes cluster. When the size of the service registry grows, Envoy does have to keep track of more endpoints, and lookup time per request does increase, but by a tiny constant. If you have many services, and this constant becomes a latency concern, Istio provides a [Sidecar resource](/docs/reference/config/networking/v1alpha3/sidecar/), which allows you to limit which services each Envoy knows about.

## 3. Measure with and without proxies

While many Istio features, such as [mutual TLS authentication](/docs/concepts/security/#mutual-tls-authentication), rely on an Envoy proxy next to an application pod, you can [selectively disable](/docs/setup/kubernetes/additional-setup/sidecar-injection/#disabling-or-updating-the-webhook) sidecar proxy injection for some of your mesh services. As you scale up Istio for production, you may want to incrementally add the sidecar proxy to your workloads.

> To that end, the test scripts provide [three different modes](https://github.com/istio/tools/tree/de2ab3e4650a2eab47002928a42fd5616f395dc2/perf/benchmark#run-performance-tests). These modes analyze Istio's performance when a request goes through both the client and server proxies (`both`), just the server proxy (`serveronly`), and neither proxy (`baseline`). We also provide an option to disable [Mixer](/docs/concepts/observability/) (telemetry) during the performance tests, which will provide results in line with the performance we expect when the Mixer V2 work is completed.

Reviewer: Add to this paragraph
```
Istio supports [Envoy native telemetry](https://github.com/istio/istio/wiki/Envoy-native-telemetry), and its performance is comparable to Mixer telemetry disabled.
```

Reviewer 3: To simplify things, I removed a couple of Mixer mentions. I also tried to make the paragraph a bit easier to consume by turning it into a list and added @mandarjog suggestion, PTAL.
```suggestion
To that end, the test scripts provide [three different modes](https://github.com/istio/tools/tree/de2ab3e4650a2eab47002928a42fd5616f395dc2/perf/benchmark#run-performance-tests):

- Use `both` to analyze Istio's performance when a request goes through both the client and server proxies.
- Use `serveronly` to analyze Istio's performance when a request goes just through the server proxy
- Use `baseline` to analyze Istio's performance when a request goes through neither proxy.

We also provide an option to disable [telemetry](/docs/concepts/observability/) during the performance tests, which  provides results in line with the performance we expect when the Mixer V2 work is completed. Istio supports [Envoy native telemetry](https://github.com/istio/istio/wiki/Envoy-native-telemetry), and its performance is comparable to Istio's performance with telemetry disabled.
```

## Istio 1.2 Performance

> The [README](https://github.com/istio/tools/tree/de2ab3e4650a2eab47002928a42fd5616f395dc2/perf/benchmark#istio-performance-benchmarking) in the [`perf/benchmarking`](https://github.com/istio/tools/tree/0dabae1760a2c1bffb87bc5cb00eaf9285ba720a/perf/benchmark)directory provides instructions for running these performance tests. We also provide instructions to run the [same scripts for the Linkerd data plane](https://github.com/istio/tools/tree/master/perf/benchmark/linkerd); currently, only latency benchmarking is supported for Linkerd.

Reviewer 3: You might only want to link to the repo, the README is displayed prominently enough there. The text is a bit confusing because it refers to the scripts for Istio as "performance tests" but to the scripts for Linkerd as "scripts". To address both issues I suggest:
```suggestion
The [performance and benchmarking](https://github.com/istio/tools/tree/de2ab3e4650a2eab47002928a42fd5616f395dc2/perf/benchmark#istio-performance-benchmarking) repository provides the resources and instructions needed to run these performance tests. We also provide instructions to run the [same performance tests for the Linkerd data plane](https://github.com/istio/tools/tree/master/perf/benchmark/linkerd). Currently, only latency benchmarking is supported for Linkerd.
```

{{< image width="75%" ratio="60%"
    link="./latency_p90.png"
    alt="Istio sidecar proxy, 90th percentile latency"
    title="Istio sidecar proxy, 90th percentile latency"
    caption=""
    >}}

Finally, in the 99th percentile, with 16 connections, Istio adds **10ms** over the baseline. At 64 connections, Istio adds **25ms** with Mixer, or **10ms** without Mixer.

{{< image  width="75%" ratio="60%"
    link="./latency_p99.png"
    alt="Istio sidecar proxy, 99th percentile latency"
    title="Istio sidecar proxy, 99th percentile latency"
    caption=""
    >}}

For CPU usage, we measured with an increasing request throughput (RPS), and a constant number of concurrent connections. We found that Envoy's maximum CPU usage at 3000 RPS, with Mixer enabled, was **1.2 vCPUs**. At 1000 RPS, one Envoy uses approximately half of a CPU.

{{< image  width="75%" ratio="60%"
    link="./cpu_max.png"
    alt="Istio sidecar proxy, max CPU usage"
    title="Istio sidecar proxy, max CPU usage"
    caption=""
    >}}

## Summary

In the process of benchmarking Istio's performance, we learned several key lessons:

> *   use an environment that mimics production

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Use an environment that mimics production.
```

> *   focus on data plane traffic

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Focus on data plane traffic.
```

> *   measure against a baseline

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Measure against a baseline.
```

> *   increase concurrent connections as well as total throughput.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Increase concurrent connections as well as total throughput.
```

For Istio 1.2, we found that on average, with 1000 RPS across 16 connections, Istio adds just **3 milliseconds** of latency over the baseline.

> A final note: Istio's performance depends on your specific setup and traffic load. Because of this variance, make sure your test setup accurately reflects your production workloads. To try out the benchmarking scripts, head over [to the Istio Tools repo](https://github.com/istio/tools/tree/76e3cb2488303316c8511a3ebe9676828c9d4765/perf/benchmark).

Reviewer 3: I suggest you make this final note a "tip" call out.
```suggestion
{{< tip >}} 
Istio's performance depends on your specific setup and traffic load. Because of this variance, make sure your test setup accurately reflects your production workloads. To try out the benchmarking scripts, head over [to the Istio Tools repo](https://github.com/istio/tools/tree/76e3cb2488303316c8511a3ebe9676828c9d4765/perf/benchmark).
{{< /tip >}}
```
